- [Toby] When your
child is diagnosed
with diabetes as an infant,
you have to do everything.
Diabetes care is 24/7.
It does not take the night off.
David is gonna be one
year old in a few days.
(sneezes)
And two days ago he was
diagnosed with diabetes.
He doesn't look
too sad about it.
(laughs)
- Daddy came and got you.
- [Father] Hello, baby David.
Do you want some?
He was about 11 months old.
And my wife, Toby, was a young
pediatrician at the time.
So she had a really keen eye
for problems in children.
- [Tob] One thing
that had happened,
which was quite scary,
is I went to get him
out of the car seat,
and when I went to get him,
he was just kind of staring.
Vacant, eyes open, but vacant.
It was very alarming,
very unusual behavior.
- [Ed] And so she
brought him in to clinic.
His blood sugar was 800,
which is eight times the
normal blood sugar level.
She collected him,
put him in the car,
raced out the door and said,
"David has diabetes, and our
lives have changed forever."
And the task was upon us to
manage his blood sugar levels.
We really had two
tools at our disposal.
We had insulin and
we had glucose,
sugar, basically.
Carbohydrates,
which is in foods like fruit,
juices.
Foods that would raise
blood sugar, carbohydrates,
we would use to keep his blood
sugar from going too low.
And then insulin was delivered
to bring his blood sugar down.
So these things are working
to oppose one another.
And the reason you
need the carbohydrates
is because you can very
often overdose insulin
just a little bit.
But even a small amount
of insulin can be lethal.
We were injecting
him with insulin
with a needle probably
seven times a day.
We were checking his blood
sugar 15 times a day.
That's how we started.
When we checked his blood sugar,
we used his fingers
and his toes,
so if he was playing with blocks
in the middle of the room,
I'd come up and I'd
poke him in a toe.
He had bruises up
and down his arms
for those first two months
when we were giving
him injections.
That was something that was
really hard for us to see.
(laughs)
(dad laughs)
You're constantly
in this tension
between high blood sugar
and low blood sugar,
because neither
extreme is acceptable.
- [Toby] There was so
much work to be done.
So all of my faculties
were focused on
taking care of this little boy.
I guess with my training it was
just too hard to think about
that he would be compromised
because I didn't do a good job.
And with Ed's personality,
that wasn't gonna happen.
(Ed laughs)
- Ready, go.
Come on, let's go get him.
The scariest prospect that
we, his parents, face,
is this phenomenon called
dead in bed syndrome.
With people with
type one diabetes,
there's a small number of
people who go to bed at night,
and they don't wake up.
This is his glucose
level over the past
roughly three hours.
You can see the fact
that he's going down,
means that if he
weren't about to eat,
he could go low.
But fortunately we're gonna
be feeding him with rice
and things that will
make him go higher.
- I put the test
strip in the meter.
I draw up some blood,
if it works.
Just scoop up a little
into the test strip.
104.
- I'm just gonna
see how it's going.
All right, give it a stir.
- Here you go.
- All right, there you go.
There's the carbohydrates.
- So David, we need to check
on the blood sugar situation.
We can take good care of David,
day and night, 24/7,
seven days a week.
But what happens when
he goes to college?
I wouldn't be there, my
wife wouldn't be there
to manage his blood
sugars for him,
or to help him take
care of his diabetes.
And that overriding concern,
worry, and fear that I had
that really
inspired, in my mind,
the idea of building
a bionic pancreas,
a system that would basically
take care of his diabetes
for us in our absence,
automatically.
Better than we could, and
more safely than we could.
I like that idea.
The fact that Toby's
a pediatrician,
I was an engineer,
that's really what
started us down that path.
The bionic pancreas really
builds on the shoulders
of decades of technology
development in medical devices.
It comes from the synthesis of
continuous glucose monitors,
from insulin pumps
from smart phones.
And it's the integration
of those three technologies
that makes a system
which is really better
than the sum of its parts.
It's basically got automated
decision making software
that determines how much
drug to deliver to the person
with type one diabetes
every five minutes.
It makes 288 decisions every day
that you no longer have to make.
- Well, a dad's invention
to save his diabetic son
could change the
lives of millions of
people with diabetes.
It is today's big idea.
Ed Damiano developed
the bionic pancreas.
- How confident are you that
your dad can meet this goal
and make this deadline to get
you off to college safely?
- I don't doubt
that he can do it.
It's definitely
very challenging.
But if anyone could
do it, my dad could.
I think what we have
to look forward to
is that our device will
play a meaningful role
in keeping all those people
with type one
diabetes who use it
safe and healthy until
there is a biological cure.